# Materials Design

Materials are an integral part of every tangible product in our every
day life. Novel materials have enabled modern civilization as we have
progressed with innovations from the light bulb to bridges to airplanes.
Advanced functional materials pervade through our everyday lives from
the LED bulb, which uses nitride-based semiconductors, to the electric
car, which uses lithium moving between two host structures namely
graphite and layered oxides. Despite these amazing success stories, the
journey towards a stable functioning product is a long and arduous one,
typically taking at least two decades from the initial lab demonstration
to a functioning device. Thus, the challenge of designing a new material
for an application is under-appreciated. An excellent illustration of
this challenge is the story of Thomas Edison and the light bulb. Sir
Humphry Davy, an English chemist, invented the world's first electric
lamp, by connecting alternating metal piles of zinc and copper to
charcoal electrodes long before the light bulb. This produced a bright
arc of light, called the arc lamp. \[Insert an illustration of the
Davy's arc lamp\] When Edison performed a seemingly exhaustive search,
at least in his mind, he tried 3000 materials followed by 6000 plants,
but could not identify tungsten. In fact, Coolidge was the one that
identified tungsten in 1910.

With approximately nineteen million known organic compounds and half a
million inorganic materials in addition to the rapidly growing number of
chemical systems synthesized, efficient screening procedures towards
specific engineering applications becomes increasingly important.
Material design calls for a high-dimensional combinatorial search if
more than one material is used for an application, which is the case
more often than not. Coinciding with strides in the materials science
field, machine learning is experiencing its own surge with many
innovations arriving at an unprecedented speed. The combination of these
two fields has itself seen much growth recently with machine learning
presenting an opportunity to quickly sift through large quantities of
materials [@Butler2018MachineScience; @Ramprasad2017MachineProspects].
The book aims to address how deep learning can accelerate materials
discovery and optimization, which is a typical example of an area in the
low-data regime. An overview of high-dimensional material-search
strategies are discussed with surrogate models and machine (deep)
learning as tools for a range of application areas including batteries,
solar photovoltaics and fuel cells.

## Materials for Batteries

Global emissions scenario studies highlight the importance of the
transport sector for climate change mitigation [@edenhofer2015climate]
with transport being responsible for about 23% of total energy-related
carbon dioxide emissions worldwide[@fischedick2014industry]. The sector
is growing more rapidly than most others, with emissions projected to
double by 2050. A major contributor to emissions from the transportation
sector is aviation. Electric aviation with sustainable power presents an
excellent path towards deep decarbonization of this sector. The progress
in this direction currently hinges on development in power generation
systems, which translate to several battery design
challenges[@bills2020performance; @fredericks2018performance] including
a multi-fold increase in the specific energy (energy storage capacity
per weight). These challenges can be achieved through materials
innovation in all the three integral components that batteries are
composed of: an anode, a cathode and an electrolyte, shown in Fig XX.
Therefore, batteries are an illustrative example of a materials design
challenge where machine learning can potentially accelerate material
discovery and optimization to enable the transition to electrification
of mobility.

All step changes have involved innovation on the material side

Batteries are essentially composed of three integral components: anode,
cathode with the electrolyte interfacing between them. It functions by
shuttling Li-ions between the anode and the cathode through the
electrolyte. The performance of the battery is determined by the choice
of these three components.

In this book, we primarily focus on designing the main components rather
than the interfaces. Modern electronics and electric cars are powered by
Li-ion batteries. The innovation story around Li-ion batteries was
honored with the Nobel Prize in Chemistry in 2019 to Stanley
Whittingham, John B. Goodenough and Akira Yoshino.

## Anode Material Design

Modern Li-ion batteries use a graphite host material, originally
demonstrated by Nobel Prize winner, Akira Yoshino. Under a fully charged
state, the lithium ions reside in graphite. When the cell is discharged,
the lithium ions move from the graphite host to the cathode host
material. The energy produced is the difference in lithium's affinity
towards the anode and cathode host materials. Thus, a good anode
material would bind to lithium very weakly, while the opposite is
desired of a cathode. Despite a number of possible host materials, only
a very limited set have seen success in practice. This is due to the
very long design cycle associated with experimental testing.

## Cathode Material Design

On the cathode side, many portable electronics still use lithium cobalt
oxide, invented by John Goodenough in 1980, for which he won the Nobel
Prize. Minor variants of this original idea swapping part of the cobalt
with nickel, manganese and aluminium, power most of the electric cars
today. While there has been impressive progress over the last decade,
there are still numerous sectors of transportation that remain
well-beyond the abilities of current batteries. This include long-haul
trucking and aviation, which require several-fold increase in specific
energy (energy per weight). This requires moving beyond the current
design space and there is an extremely large design space of oxides,
fluorides, oxyfluorides, sulfides that offer promise.

## Electrolyte Design

The electrolyte, often called the secret sauce, is typically a liquid
that comprises of solvent(s) and salt. Modern lithium-ion batteries
contain at least 2-3 main solvents with a dozen additives. The additives
play an extremely important role in determining the longevitity of the
battery, operating window and safety. Given that most of organic
chemistry (millions of compounds) is a valid design space, the design of
an electrolyte is probably the grandest challenge facing a battery
scientist. This is best exemplified by a statement from the famous
battery scientist, Jeff Dahn, "Go get the Sigma-Alrich catalog, put on
the table, open it up, and every single thing there is potentially a
good additive. I am not joking. Then you learn that generally two
additives is better than one, three is better than two, then you have a
huge space to work in."

## Materials for Solar Cells

One important part of bringing down the emissions is to clean up the
grid. Solar energy is one efficient way to bring down the emissions,
using the fusion energy from the sun into electrons that could be used
to do work. Solar cells (also called a photovoltaic cell, PV) work by
converting incoming solar radiation into electrical energy. The
performance of a solar cell is largely determined by the chosen
material. The efficiency timeline of development of solar cells is
carefully
[https://www.nrel.gov/pv/cell-efficiency.html](curated by National Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL)).

The performance of the device is determined by the ability of the
material to absorb light and create an electron-hole pair. This
electron-hole pair should reach the external circuit before they
recombine. The ability of a material to absorb light is determined by a
quantity known as band gap. Semiconductors are materials that typically
possess moderate band gap (1-3 eV) and are ideal candidates to match
with the incoming solar spectrum. They are characterized by their
efficiency numbers, which quantifies what fraction of the incident
energy from the solar radiation is converted to electrical energy.

Silicon is one of the most popular materials and remains among the most
widely used photovoltaic material today. A single-junction Silicon solar
cell has improved in efficiency from around 13% in 1980s to over 25%
today. Alongside, GaAs has been a material widely studied with
efficiency increase from around 280% in the early 2000s to around 31%
today. Another class of materials widely explored are thin-film solar
cells made up of CIGS (Copper Indium Galium Selenide) and CdTe (Cadium
Telleuride)m which have grown in efficiency from 20% to 23% over the
last couple of decades. Photovoltaic materials can broadly be classified
based on composition into organic and inorganic photovoltaics where
perovskites photovoltaics are typically organic-inorganic hybrid
materials.

*Organics photovoltaics*: The development of organic semiconductors for
photovoltaic devices stems from efforts to find cheaper altearnatives to
semiconductor grade silicon and has led to unexpected performance for an
alternative choice of materials to convert sunlight to
electricity.[@inganas2018organic] Novel materials and developed concepts
have improved the resulting photovoltage in organic photovoltaic
devices, where
[reports](https://www.nrel.gov/pv/insights/assets/pdfs/cell-pv-eff-emergingpv.pdf)
over the last couple of years (2019-2020) of polymer/acceptor based
devices indicate above 17.4% power conversion efficiency in sunlight
(PCE).[@zhao2017molecular; @hou2018organic] The exploration of organic
materials for this application began with the realization that organic
dyes have very strong optical absorption, which can be leveraged to
absorb sections of the solar spectrum. Many dyes have been
studied[@merritt1976organic] including chlorophyll, which absorbs
sunlight in green
plants.[@tang1975transient; @tang1975chlorophyll; @tang1975photovoltaic; @inganas1981charge; @inganas1983photoelectrochemistry]
Dyes in organic optoelectronic devices in the form of bilayer devices in
1986 was the first published demonstration of a photovoltaic devices
with a 1% power conversion efficiency.[@tang1986two] Polymers were
another class of organic materials that gained interest when the field
underwent a fundamental transition from bilayer structures to bulk
heterojunctions with the advantage that bulk heterojunctions host a
large amount of interfaces between donor and acceptor rather than a
single plane as in the case of bilayer junctions. Along this line of
work, key developments in the last couple of decade of the 20th century
include the identification of fullerene
(C$_\{60\}$)[@hummelen1995preparation] and derivatives as promising
acceptors and a range of polymers as donors: poly(paraphenylene
vinylene) (PPV)[@smilowitz1993photoexcitation] and the polythiophene
(PT) family[@yohannes1998photoelectrochemical] that led to organic light
emitting diodes (OLEDs).[@berggren1994light] In the early 2000s, focus
shifted towards developing alternating copolymers[@blouin2008toward]
with donors and acceptors in a main chain polymer as an approach to
enhance the photovoltage, the overlap with the solar spectrum, and
reduce energy losses. Specific alternating copolymers worth highlighting
include alternating copolymers of quinoxaline with thiophene and
isoindigo with thiophene, which led to PCEs in the range 5-9
%.[@wang2013conformational; @wang2011f] Over the last couple of decades,
higher PCEs within organics have been achieved through material
development towards non-fullerene acceptors, novel polymer-polymer
blends and ternary materials, where multiple donors and acceptors are
blended.[@inganas2018organic]

*Perovskite (inorganic-organic) photovoltaics*: The most studied
perovskite solar cells (PSCs) are organic--halide perovskites. Halide
perovskites have revolutionized the emerging photovoltaic technologies
since they have emerged as light harvesters and hole-transport
materials.[@hao2014lead] Organic--inorganic hybrid perovskite compounds
based on metal halides adopt the ABX$_3$ perovskite structure, where the
B atom is a metal cation and X is typically F$_2$, Br$_2$, Cl$_2$ or
I$_2$. A promising family of perovskite compounds can be represented as
CH$_3$NH$_3$PbX$_3$ (X $=$ I, Cl, Br) perovskite absorbers (PCEs $>$
15%), however, efforts toward lead-free perovskites (PCEs $\approx$ 6%)
have led to the identification of a class that can be represented as
CH$_3$NH$_3$SnX$_3$ where (X $=$ I, Cl, Br or combinations).
Furthermore, although there are broad material development prospects for
perovskite solar cells, the associated lead toxicity and instability
resulting from the use of organic--inorganic hybrid halide lead
perovskites limit their application. Over the past few years, the
development of environmentally-friendly, stable and efficient perovskite
materials have long-term practical significance from the standpoint of
commercialization. The highest PCE achieved for an inorganic lead-free
perovskite solar cell was around 4.8% for CsSnX$_3$ but exhibits poor
air stability. Therefore, an active research topic in the field of
photovoltaics is the development of inorganic (or stable
organic-inorganic) lead-free perovskite light absorbing materials.

The material search space is extraordinarily large and rich with the
number of possible organic-inorganic material combinations for
photovoltaics.

## Materials for Superconductivity

Another holy grail towards an electrified future is to bring down the
transmission losses, which can be about 5-10% of the electricity
generation. There has been on-going search for superconducting materials
that would be functional at or near room temperature for several
decades. This has proved to be elusive.

Superconductivity is the property of a material to exhibit zero
resistance to the flow of current. The phenomenon of superconductivity
was originally discovered in 1911 by Heike Onnes when he was measuring
the electrical conductivity of pure metals, mercury and then
subsequently tin and lead. He observed that resistance of a solid
mercury wire at 4.2 K suddenly vanished. Within two years, in 1913, he
won the Nobel Prize in Physics for this discovery. This led to a
century-long race to increase the critical temperature, i.e. the highest
temperature below which a material is superconducting. Over the next
several decades, metals and intermetallics, such as Nb, Nb$_3$Sn,
Nb$_3$Ge were tested and exhibited critical temperatures in the range of
10-30K.

Then, in the late 1980s, there was renewed interest following a seminal
discovery by Bednorz and Müller that perovskites based on Lanthanum
Barium Copper Oxide (LBCO) was superconducting. They won the Nobel Prize
in Physics in 1987 for this discovery and following this, numerous
perovskite based materials were tested. The family of materials, called
cuprate superonductors, were able to reach a critical temperature of
133-138 K. The highest-temperature superconductor in this family is
material comprising of mercury, barium, calcium, copper and oxygen.

In the last decade, high pressure was used to stabilize materials in
exotic structures, which have exhibited superconductivity. Among these,
hydrogen sulfide (H$_2$S) has been shown to be superconducting at 150
gigapascal (GPa) pressure with a critical temperature of 80 K. Following
this, other hydrides such as scandium hydride and lanthanum hydride have
been studied. The current record holder is lanthanum hydride with a
critical temperature of 250 K at a pressure of 170 GPa.

Alongside these developments, another interesting direction is to use
angular twist between materials to trigger superconductivity. In 2018,
it was demonstrated that twisted bi-layer graphene with a magic angle of
1.1$^\circ$ exhibits superconductivity albeit at very low temperatures.

The problem of superconductivity is fundamentally a material search
problem. Given the numerous possible degrees of freedom (twist,
pressure), no serious constraints placed on possible materials, the
search space of possible superconductors is truly enormous. If indeed
deep learning is able discover a new superconductor with a critical
temperature of around 300K, it will undoubtedly deserve a Nobel
Prize.[@kitano2016artificial]
