# Geometric Learning in Quantum Chemistry \{#chap:geometric_quantum\}

------------------------------------------------------------------------

\
**Prerequisites:** [\[chap:pde\]](#chap:pde)\{reference-type="ref+label"
reference="chap:pde"\},
[\[chap:simple_physics\]](#chap:simple_physics)\{reference-type="ref+label"
reference="chap:simple_physics"\}\
**Difficulty Level:** \*\*\

------------------------------------------------------------------------

\"\"\" We present a geometric deep learning method for modeling
molecular properties using inputs obtained from low-level
atom-orbital-basis quantum chemistry simulations. The proposed learning
framework is strictly equivariant with respect to coordinate
transformations without the need for a predefined descriptor-generation
procedure. On diverse downstream benchmarks, our method shows excellent
chemical-space transferability and predicts various real-space and
energy-space properties within the accuracy of density functional theory
at an order-of-magnitudes reduced computational cost. The framework
presented here is readily applicable to alternative featurization on
either molecular or periodic systems. \"\"\"

References [@qiao2020orbnet], [@qiao2021unite]

\"\"\" Equivariant neural networks have been successful in incorporating
various types of symmetries, but are mostly limited to vector
representations of geometric objects. Despite the prevalence of
higher-order tensors in various application domains, e.g. in quantum
chemistry, equivariant neural networks for general tensors remain
underexplored. Previous strategies for learning equivariant functions on
tensors mostly rely on expensive tensor factorization which is not
scalable when the dimensionality of the problem becomes large. In this
work, we propose unitary N-body tensor equivariant neural network
(UNiTE), an architecture for a general class of symmetric tensors called
N-body tensors. The proposed neural network is equivariant with respect
to the actions of a unitary group, such as the group of 3D rotations.
Furthermore, it has a linear time complexity with respect to the number
of non-zero elements in the tensor. When applied to quantum chemistry,
UNiTE in combination with a low-cost physics-based molecular
representation outperforms state-of-the-art machine learning methods on
multiple benchmarks. Finally, we show that UNiTE achieves a robust
zero-shot generalization performance on diverse down stream chemistry
tasks, while being three orders of magnitude faster than conventional
numerical methods with competitive accuracy. \"\"\"
