# Physics Guided Loss Functions \{#chap:phys_loss\}

------------------------------------------------------------------------

\
**Prerequisites:**
[\[chap:pinns\]](#chap:pinns)\{reference-type="ref+label"
reference="chap:pinns"\}\
**Difficulty Level:** \*\*\

------------------------------------------------------------------------

\"\"\" The rapid growth of data in water resources has created new
opportunities to accelerate knowledge discovery with the use of advanced
deep learning tools. Hybrid models that integrate theory with
state‐of‐the art empirical techniques have the potential to improve
predictions while remaining true to physical laws. This paper evaluates
the Process‐Guided Deep Learning (PGDL) hybrid modeling framework with a
use‐case of predicting depth‐specific lake water temperatures. The PGDL
model has three primary components: a deep learning model with temporal
awareness (long short‐term memory recurrence), theory‐based feedback
(model penalties for violating conversation of energy), and model
pretraining to initialize the network with synthetic data (water
temperature predictions from a process‐based model). In situ water
temperatures were used to train the PGDL model, a deep learning (DL)
model, and a process‐based (PB) model. Model performance was evaluated
in various conditions, including when training data were sparse and when
predictions were made outside of the range in the training data set. The
PGDL model performance (as measured by root‐mean‐square error (RMSE))
was superior to DL and PB for two detailed study lakes, but only when
pretraining data included greater variability than the training period.
The PGDL model also performed well when extended to 68 lakes, with a
median RMSE of 1.65 °C during the test period (DL: 1.78 °C, PB: 2.03 °C;
in a small number of lakes PB or DL models were more accurate). This
case‐study demonstrates that integrating scientific knowledge into deep
learning tools shows promise for improving predictions of many important
environmental variables. \"\"\"

References [@willard2020integrating], [@read2019process]
