# Geometric Convolutional Networks \{#chap:geometric_convolutional\}

------------------------------------------------------------------------

\
**Prerequisites:**
[\[chap:mpnn\]](#chap:mpnn)\{reference-type="ref+label"
reference="chap:mpnn"\}\
**Difficulty Level:** \*\*\

------------------------------------------------------------------------

\"For many industries, simulation is now becoming a guide to design
rather than a mere final validation tool. A classical approach to
reducing the computational complexity is to use surrogate modelling via
Gaussian Process (GP) regressors, or others, trained to interpolate the
performance landscape given a low dimensional parametrization of the
design space. However, the regressors sometimes offer poor performance
and are specific to a particular parameterization. Like other
learning-based methods, Geometric Convolutional Neural Networks can be
used to build surrogate models of numerical solvers. However, it suffers
none of the drawbacks of previous surrogate methods, such as the ones
mentioned above. It is agnostic to the shape parameters as it processes
directly the mesh representation of the design. Hence, optimization or
design parameters are decoupled from the learning problem and a single
predictor can be trained with a large amount of data and used for many
optimization tasks. In this presentation we will present two methods of
learnable parametrization for geometries that eliminate the drawbacks of
standard shape parameterization techniques for optimisations. Finally,
we will briefly introduce Neural Concept Shape (NCS), a software
platform that lets engineering teams, at all levels of expertise,
implement neural network technologies into their workflows. The NCS user
is working in a fully managed environment, where everything has been
thought to make his work, at the frontier between data-science and
traditional engineering, as effective and efficient as possible.\"

References [@baque2018geodesic], [@remelli2020meshsdf],
[@durasov2021masksembles].
