# Learning Phase Fields from Solution Data \{#chap:hamiltonian_nn\}

------------------------------------------------------------------------

\
**Prerequisites:**
[\[chap:hamiltonians_mechanics\]](#chap:hamiltonians_mechanics)\{reference-type="ref+label"
reference="chap:hamiltonians_mechanics"\},
[\[chap:neural_ode\]](#chap:neural_ode)\{reference-type="ref+label"
reference="chap:neural_ode"\}\
**Difficulty Level:** \*\*\

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Hey Bharath, um I'm glad I got voicemail because I wanted to record this
so that we keep it for the future. One more in the diffphys. First well
open problems and then obviously something you know we should definitely
file on. This whole field of phase field simulations basically what you
do is you start with a free energy functional and then once you have the
free energy functional, um all the control, sort of physical laws emerge
as derivatives of the phase field free energy. So completely diff
phys'able. And the answer of that solution field is what you typically
observe. And so what the canonical challenge in the field is to try and
write down the free energy functional. Same exchange correlation
problem, right. So you observe some outside answer and you have to back
propagate through it. So exactly in that same way, in a battery case for
example, you observe the morphology of the deposits and you have to
backpropagate and say what is the overall free energy of the system and
how it evolves.

So basically what we can do with this is learn the free energy
functional for any arbitrary system by observing the latent dynamics and
then diff phys'ing all the way. Another one of these things that I'm
thinking is crazy right now and then like six months from now we will
think this is totally obvious. This would basically encompass like a
large portion of mechanics, and then microstructures, and even things
like metallurgy, nuclear fusion all kinds of different areas. So just
want to drop this so that we keep it for the record and we can try to
populate.

\"Phase Field Model For Fatigue Cracking in Electrode Particles\" -
Weilong Ai, etc

Cracking of electrode particles.

## Introduction

Battery electrodes crack because of flux loadinig.Fracture exposes fresh
new electrode surfaces and corrsion proceeds.

Hundreds of cycles are needed before electrode particles experience
cracking.

Order reduced model developed for fatigue crack propagation in electrode
particles. Fatiigue crack growth follow's Paris' law. (Predicts SEI(?)
formation on cracks). The model can make prediction on future behavior.

## Couple Electrochemo-mechanical Batter Models

Make models of lithium ion batteries across scales.

Particle fraction, lithium flkaing, SEI flaking, PE structure
decomposition, and particle fracture.

Combination of P2D battery model, and mechanical model for electrode
particles, and model heterogenous stress in pouch cells.

Develop fully fully coupled battery degradation model = SEI growth, Li
Plating, Particle Cracking, and Loss of Active Material.

## Phase Field Fatigue Crack Model for Electrode Particles

$$\begin\{aligned\}
\frac\{dc\}\{dt\} + \nabla \cdot J &= 0 \\
(1 - \phi^2)\nabla \cdot \phhi &= 0 \\
\frac\{\phi G_a\}\{l\} - l \nabla (G_d \nabla \phi) &= 2(1 - \phi) \mathcal\{H\} \\
\end\{aligned\}$$

Finite element method is used to discretize the three fields. Use
Newton-Raphson to model the nonlinear equations.

Damage accumulation in fracture toughness causes issues. Griffith's
theory explains part of crack.

Model cylindrical, spherical, and realistic models.

There is a phenomenon of multi-crack coalescence. Lower lithium
concentrations in cracks. [TODO: What ]\{style="color: red"\}
