# A Brief Introduction to Optics \{#chap:optics\}

------------------------------------------------------------------------

\
**Prerequisites:**
[\[chap:simple_physics\]](#chap:simple_physics)\{reference-type="ref+label"
reference="chap:simple_physics"\}\
**Difficulty Level:** \*\

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Optics studies the motion of light through various materials. In
principle, light is an electromagnetic phenomenon and can be modeled by
Maxwell's equations. In practice, this is very burdensome, and effective
simple models of light's behavior in various domains exist. We will
discuss some of these models in this section

## Ray Optics

Ray optics supposes that light travels in straight lines called rays.

### Reflection

Light rays can reflect off material surfaces. Such reflection can be
specular, reflecting light in one direction based on the input angle, or
diffuse and reflecting inbound light in a range of different directions.

### Refaction Snell's Law

This law provides a basic model for the behavior of the refraction of
light as it passes between two surfaces

$$\begin\{aligned\}
\frac\{\sin \theta_1\}\{\sin \theta_2\} &= \frac\{n_2\}\{n_1\}
\end\{aligned\}$$

![An illustration of Snell's
Law.](figures/Physics/optics/snells_law.png)\{width="50%"\}

## Physical Optics

Physical optics models light as waves. These waves travel at the speed
of light $c$ and are governed by Maxwell's equations.

### The Superposition Principle

The superposition principle holds true in most simple optical systems
and states that the behavior of a light wave can be understood as the
superposition of plane waves (light waves with fixed frequency,
polarization, and direction). This principle allow for the use of
Fourier analysis in modeling optical systems.

### Polarization

The light wave is made up of oscillating electric and magnetic fields.
The polarization of light is given by the orientation of these
oscillating fields. If the oscillation direction is fixed, the light is
linearly polarized, wherease if the direction rotates, the light is
circularly or elliptically polarized.

## An Introduction to Nonlinear Optics

A nonlinear media is one in which the polarization density $P$ of the
material responds nonlinearly to the electric field $E$. The
superposition principle breaks down for these systems. Nonlinear
phenomena commonly arise from applications such as lasers or harmonic
generation, which seeks to create light at higher frequencies than the
input frequency. Modeling nonlinear systems typically requires direct
solution of Maxwell's equations rather than simpler more inexpensive
approximations.
