# Fundamentals of Material Characterization \{#chap:fund_matchar\}

------------------------------------------------------------------------

\
**Prerequisites:**
[\[chap:schrodinger\]](#chap:schrodinger)\{reference-type="ref+label"
reference="chap:schrodinger"\}\
**Difficulty Level:** \*\*\

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Modern ML methods use a variety of input data from materials
characterization -- on which build ML models -- associated output data.

In this overview chapter, we review different techniques for
characterizing the properties of materials with the aim of giving you a
high level overview of different techniques for characterizing materials
properties.

## Microscopy

Microscopy is a category of material characterization techniques which
probe and map the surface and sub-surface structure of a material. These
techniques can use photons, electrons, ions or physical cantilever
probes to gather data about a sample's structure on a range of length
scales. Some common examples of microscopy instruments include:

-   Optical Microscope

-   Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM)

-   Transmission Electron Microscope (TEM)

-   Field Ion Microscope (FIM)

-   Scanning Tunneling Microscope (STM)

-   Scanning probe microscopy (SPM)

-   Atomic Force Microscope (AFM)

-   X-ray diffraction topography (XRT)

### SEM

A scanning electron microscope (SEM) is a type of electron microscope
that produces images of a sample by scanning the surface with a focused
beam of electrons. The electrons interact with atoms in the sample,
producing various signals that contain information about the surface
topography and composition of the sample. The electron beam is scanned
in a raster scan pattern, and the position of the beam is combined with
the intensity of the detected signal to produce an image. In the most
common SEM mode, secondary electrons emitted by atoms excited by the
electron beam are detected using a secondary electron detector. The
number of secondary electrons that can be detected, and thus the signal
intensity, depends, among other things, on specimen topography. SEM can
achieve resolution better than 1 nanometer.

### TEM

Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) is a microscopy technique in
which a beam of electrons is transmitted through a specimen to form an
image. The specimen is most often an ultrathin section less than 100 nm
thick or a suspension on a grid. An image is formed from the interaction
of the electrons with the sample as the beam is transmitted through the
specimen. The image is then magnified and focused onto an imaging
device, such as a fluorescent screen, a layer of photographic film, or a
sensor such as a scintillator attached to a charge-coupled device.

Transmission electron microscopes are capable of imaging at a
significantly higher resolution than light microscopes, owing to the
smaller de Broglie wavelength of electrons. This enables the instrument
to capture fine detail---even as small as a single column of atoms,
which is thousands of times smaller than a resolvable object seen in a
light microscope. Transmission electron microscopy is a major analytical
method in the physical, chemical and biological sciences. TEMs find
application in cancer research, virology, and materials science as well
as pollution, nanotechnology and semiconductor research, but also in
other fields such as paleontology and palynology.

### STEM

A scanning transmission electron microscope (STEM) is a type of
transmission electron microscope (TEM). As with a conventional
transmission electron microscope (CTEM), images are formed by electrons
passing through a sufficiently thin specimen. However, unlike CTEM, in
STEM the electron beam is focused to a fine spot (with the typical spot
size 0.05 -- 0.2 nm) which is then scanned over the sample in a raster
illumination system constructed so that the sample is illuminated at
each point with the beam parallel to the optical axis. The rastering of
the beam across the sample makes STEM suitable for analytical techniques
such as Z-contrast annular dark-field imaging, and spectroscopic mapping
by energy dispersive X-ray (EDX) spectroscopy, or electron energy loss
spectroscopy (EELS). These signals can be obtained simultaneously,
allowing direct correlation of images and spectroscopic data.

## Microscopy

Microscopy methods provide powerful tools to inspect the local structure
of materials. Microscopy can be performed at human-visible wavelengths,
or alternatively with UV light.

### X-Rays

X-ray crystallography (XRC) is the experimental science determining the
atomic and molecular structure of a crystal, in which the crystalline
structure causes a beam of incident X-rays to diffract into many
specific directions. By measuring the angles and intensities of these
diffracted beams, a crystallographer can produce a three-dimensional
picture of the density of electrons within the crystal. From this
electron density, the mean positions of the atoms in the crystal can be
determined, as well as their chemical bonds, their crystallographic
disorder, and various other information.

The oldest and most precise method of X-ray crystallography is
single-crystal X-ray diffraction, in which a beam of X-rays strikes a
single crystal, producing scattered beams. When they land on a piece of
film or other detector, these beams make a diffraction pattern of spots;
the strengths and angles of these beams are recorded as the crystal is
gradually rotated. Each spot is called a reflection, since it
corresponds to the reflection of the X-rays from one set of evenly
spaced planes within the crystal. For single crystals of sufficient
purity and regularity, X-ray diffraction data can determine the mean
chemical bond lengths and angles to within a few thousandths of an
angstrom and to within a few tenths of a degree, respectively. The atoms
in a crystal are not static, but oscillate about their mean positions,
usually by less than a few tenths of an angstrom. X-ray crystallography
allows measuring the size of these oscillations.

## X-Ray absorption

X-ray absorption spectroscopy (XAS) is a widely used technique for
determining the local geometric and/or electronic structure of matter.
The experiment is usually performed at synchrotron radiation facilities,
which provide intense and tunable X-ray beams. Samples can be in the gas
phase, solutions, or solids.

### XANES

X-ray absorption near edge structure (XANES), also known as near edge
X-ray absorption fine structure (NEXAFS), is a type of absorption
spectroscopy that indicates the features in the X-ray absorption spectra
(XAS) of condensed matter due to the photoabsorption cross section for
electronic transitions from an atomic core level to final states in the
energy region of 50--100 eV above the selected atomic core level
ionization energy, where the wavelength of the photoelectron is larger
than the interatomic distance between the absorbing atom and its first
neighbour atoms.

## XPS

X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) is a surface-sensitive
quantitative spectroscopic technique based on the photoelectric effect
that can identify the elements that exist within a material (elemental
composition) or are covering its surface, their chemical state, as well
as the overall electronic structure and density of the electronic states
in the material. XPS is a powerful measurement technique because it not
only shows what elements are present, but also what other elements they
are bonded to. The technique can be used in line profiling of the
elemental composition across the surface, or in depth profiling when
paired with ion-beam etching. It is often applied to study chemical
processes in the materials in their as-received state or after cleavage,
scraping, exposure to heat, reactive gasses or solutions, ultraviolet
light, or during ion beam implantation.

## Raman

Raman spectroscopy (named after Indian physicist C. V. Raman) is a
spectroscopic technique typically used to determine vibrational modes of
molecules, although rotational and other low-frequency modes of systems
may also be observed. Raman spectroscopy is commonly used in chemistry
to provide a structural fingerprint by which molecules can be
identified.

Raman spectroscopy relies upon inelastic scattering of photons, known as
Raman scattering. A source of monochromatic light, usually from a laser
in the visible, near infrared, or near ultraviolet range is used,
although X-rays can also be used. The laser light interacts with
molecular vibrations, phonons or other excitations in the system,
resulting in the energy of the laser photons being shifted up or down.
The shift in energy gives information about the vibrational modes in the
system. Infrared spectroscopy typically yields similar, complementary,
information.

## NMR

Nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy, most commonly known as NMR
spectroscopy or magnetic resonance spectroscopy (MRS), is a
spectroscopic technique to observe local magnetic fields around atomic
nuclei. The sample is placed in a magnetic field and the NMR signal is
produced by excitation of the nuclei sample with radio waves into
nuclear magnetic resonance, which is detected with sensitive radio
receivers. The intramolecular magnetic field around an atom in a
molecule changes the resonance frequency, thus giving access to details
of the electronic structure of a molecule and its individual functional
groups. As the fields are unique or highly characteristic to individual
compounds, in modern organic chemistry practice, NMR spectroscopy is the
definitive method to identify monomolecular organic compounds.
Similarly, biochemists use NMR to identify proteins and other complex
molecules. Besides identification, NMR spectroscopy provides detailed
information about the structure, dynamics, reaction state, and chemical
environment of molecules. The most common types of NMR are proton and
carbon-13 NMR spectroscopy, but it is applicable to any kind of sample
that contains nuclei possessing spin.
