# Extended Physics Informed Neural Networks (XPINNs) \{#chap:pinns_ns\}

------------------------------------------------------------------------

\
**Prerequisites:**
[\[chap:pinns\]](#chap:pinns)\{reference-type="ref+label"
reference="chap:pinns"\},\
**Difficulty Level:** \*\*\

------------------------------------------------------------------------

\"We propose a generalized space-time domain decomposition approach for
the physics-informed neural networks (PINNs) to solve nonlinear partial
differential equations (PDEs) on arbitrary complex-geometry domains. The
proposed framework, named eXtended PINNs (XPINNs), further pushes the
boundaries of both PINNs as well as conservative PINNs (cPINNs), which
is a recently proposed domain decomposition approach in the PINN
framework tailored to the conservation laws. Compared to PINN, the XPINN
method has large representation and parallelization capacity due to the
inherent property of deployment of multiple neural networks in the
smaller subdomains. Unlike cPINN, XPINN can be extended to any type of
PDEs. Moreover, the domain can be decomposed in any arbitrary way (in
space and time), which is not possible in cPINN. Thus, XPINN offers both
space and time parallelization, thereby reducing the training cost more
effectively. In each subdomain, a separate neural network is employed
with optimally selected hyperparameters, e.g., depth/width of the
network, number, and location of residual points, activation function,
optimization method, etc. A deep network can be employed in a subdomain
with complex solution, whereas a shallow neural network can be used in a
subdomain with relatively simple and smooth solutions. We demonstrate
the versatility of XPINN by solving both forward and inverse PDE
problems, ranging from one-dimensional to three-dimensional problems,
from time-dependent to time-independent problems, and from continuous to
discontinuous problems, which clearly shows that the XPINN method is
promising in many practical problems. The proposed XPINN method is the
generalization of PINN and cPINN methods, both in terms of applicability
as well as domain decomposition approach, which efficiently lends itself
to parallelized computation.\"

References [@jagtap2020extended]
