# Modeling Turbulent Mixing \{#chap:ml_turbulence\}

------------------------------------------------------------------------

\
**Prerequisites:**
[\[chap:qft_basics\]](#chap:qft_basics)\{reference-type="ref+label"
reference="chap:qft_basics"\}\
**Difficulty Level:** \*\*\

------------------------------------------------------------------------

In this chapter we'll cover machine learning methods that are promising
for fluid turbulence modeling. Specially, we'll present a Reynolds
averaged turbulence modelling approach using deep neural networks with
embedded invariance [@milani2021turbulent], [@milani2020generalization],
[@milani2019enriching]. Such techniques could prove useful for
industrial processes such as film cooling, a technology used to cool gas
turbine components. In standard practice, only low fidelity numerical
simulations can be used to design these systems, but new machine learned
approaches could dramatically accelerate these applications. The core
idea is to run a few expensive simulations to gain data on the
turbulence for simple flows, and then use this data to train a
downstream machine learning model that is invariant to coordinate
transformations, and applicable to any choice of meshing.

## Turbulence Modeling

Reynolds-averaged Navier--Stokes (RANS) models are widely used because
of their computational tractability. There exists significant demand for
improved Reynolds-averaged Navier--Stokes (RANS) turbulence models that
are informed by and can represent a richer set of turbulence physics.
The approach we are going to look at in this chapter uses a deep neural
network to learn a model for the Reynolds stress anisotropy tensor from
high-fidelity simulation data. A novel neural network architecture is
proposed which uses a multiplicative layer with an invariant tensor
basis to embed Galilean invariance into the predicted anisotropy tensor.
It is demonstrated that this neural network architecture provides
improved prediction accuracy compared with a generic neural network
architecture that does not embed this invariance property. The Reynolds
stress anisotropy predictions of this invariant neural network are
propagated through to the velocity field for two test cases. For both
test cases, significant improvement versus baseline RANS linear eddy
viscosity and nonlinear eddy viscosity models is demonstrated.
