# Renormalization versus Renormalization Group \{#chap:renormalization_group\}

------------------------------------------------------------------------

\
**Prerequisites:**
[\[chap:qft_basics\]](#chap:qft_basics)\{reference-type="ref+label"
reference="chap:qft_basics"\}\
**Difficulty Level:** \*\*\

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Renormalization provides a systematic set of rules to perform
corrections to infinities that arise in quantum field-theoretic
calculations in order to arrive at finite numbers. This process is
typically done in two steps: first, regularization is applied to remove
infinite terms in integrals. Second, parameters of the Lagrangian are
adjusted to match known experimental measurements. These adjustments are
interpreted as corrections due to field interactions.

## Classical Analogs

Before the introduction of Einstein's relativity theory, classical
physics studied the concept of an aether that spread across all of space
and time. Charged particles moving in the aether would, due to
self-induction, appear to have a higher mass than the base particle.
Similar calculations where undertaken in hydrodynamics for the inertia
of particles suspended in a fluid. These calculations also yielded
infinities analogous to those that arise in quantum field theory.

## Regularization Methods

There are a variety of methods for controlling the divergent integrals
that arise in quantum field theoretic calculations. One method is
lattice regularization, in which integrals are replaced with finite sums
over meshes. Another method is to cut off large momenta above some level
$\Lambda$.

## Renormalization Group in Critical Phenomenon

For low and high temperatures, perturbative expansions yield solutions
to the correlation functions for Ising models. However, near the
critical crossover point $\xi$, these methods fail since there is a
singularity. The renormalization group constructs a transformation that
shifts the position of the critical point. You can then solve at $\xi$
in the renormalization representation and recover the original solution.

## Quantum Field Theory Setup

We consider the simple $\phi^4$ quantum field theory. This is a
non-Gaussian theory with action

$$\begin\{aligned\}
    S &= \int \Bigg [ \frac\{1\}\{2\}(\nabla \phi(x))^2 + \frac\{1\}\{2\}m_0^2 \phi^2(x) + \frac\{\lambda_0\}\{4!\}\phi^4(x) \Bigg ] d^4 x \\
    &= S_0 + s_I
\end\{aligned\}$$

The two point correlation function is defined as

$$\begin\{aligned\}
    G(x) &= \langle \phi(x)\phi(0) \rangle \\
    &= \frac\{\int[\mathcal\{D\}\phi] \phi(x) \phi(0) e^\{-S\}\}\{\int [\mathcal\{D\}\phi] e^\{-S\}\}
\end\{aligned\}$$

Assuming $\lambda_0$ is $0$ we land back to a Gaussian integral which we
can solve.
